for any reason, that's easy to do. All right. Let's
start. Go ahead. I can see that it's working. One,
two, three, say a sentence. You think it's
working? Okay. This is May 9, sitting on the 10th
floor of the Rudder Tower, getting ready to
interview Dr. Malin Sutherland, the Vice
President for Student Affairs. Malin, as we
begin, for someone who might listen to this tape or
read the transcribed version in coming years who
might not know you, would you begin by summarizing
your background before A&M? Where did you grow up?
What did parents do for a living? Where did you go to
high school and so forth? All right, thank you,
Haskell. I basically grew up in Houston. My
parents divorced when I was three. The
Sutherlands are from East Texas, all small towns.
Dad was one of nine children, and so I still have a
herd of aunts and uncles and cousins. My mother's
side was much smaller. Mother was a nurse, so she
went to Houston, and I grew up, by today's
standards, downtown. I went to Roberts
Elementary and Wharton Elementary and Lanier
Junior High and San Jacinto High School. Came here
in the fall of 60 as a freshman. I already had been in
ROTC so I had a strong interest in being
commissioned. I tell students today that to be
admitted to the A&M College of Texas you had to have
a high school You had to have graduated from high
school. And it's always good for a good laugh, and
they're not sure they believe you. But it's very
true. As far as you can recall, where did you first
begin to have an interest in coming to A&M? Where
did that get? It was because of ROTC. I actually had
a family friend that worked for Congressman
Thomas in Houston. And so there was a very meager
attempt at getting a commission to West Point,
appointment to West Point. But I didn't have the
academic background or the strength to do that. So
the sort of obvious next choice in Texas was A&M. Do
you remember when you first visited here? I would
assume the first time I came was when I came in the
summer to take some testing after I'd already been
admitted. I do not know that I'd ever been here for
any reason prior to that. Took the bus from
Houston, walked up the main gate. I remember it was
in the chemistry building. I remember the test was
given and did something the next morning and went
home. Did it make any impression? Did you run into
Aggies or? Any distinctive greeting or anything
like that? This was summer and, you know, early
evening, and I don't have any distinctive
memories. Had you seen a Rice A&M football game
possible? I had seen football games every year
because I did go to all the Rice games, you know, as a
high school student in Houston. And we lived in
West University Place with a second marriage for
about three years of my mother. And so we went to all
of those games. Dickie Magel was the superstar
with Rice. And I saw the A&M game where Rice had them
down by 12 points, I think. And A&M scored three
touchdowns in less than four minutes. So that was
pretty easy to remember. There was a guy named Dick
Gottlieb who was a very active Aggie in Houston.
and had one of the first television shows that were
local. And it was, I remember it was sponsored by
Hickey P-Lot Grocery and some kind of a silly game.
And he often spoke of A&M, talked of core trips when
they came and football and stuff. And I remember
that. And fortunately, I got to know him. You know,
as time went along, he ended up being a city
councilman, very, very active in Houston. And one
of my stories ended up relating to him, too. Now,
when you came to enroll, how did you get here and how
did that visit? Came by bus. That night, my mother
did drove me up here. the sort of typical story of
pulling up to Moore Hall and get out of the car with
your footlocker and you know good luck and
goodbye. What'd you have in the footlocker do you
remember? I don't know, just normal things. So you
don't recall bringing anything that turned out to
be truly superfluous and unmeaning? No, we didn't
have the money to have any superfluous stuff. It
was just whatever they had said bring is what I
would have brought. Describe getting into that
room and becoming a part of an outfit. I remember it
as fairly routine. It was all new, completely new
to me. You start meeting people and moving in. I had
a roommate. The fish old lady was from New Iberia,
Louisiana, and he was just kind of a good old boy. He
was a little shorter in stature, but he had a car, a
brand new car, a Studebaker Lark, I think it was.
And so we were together all in the fall and caused
two or three interesting things to happen. And I
had a different roommate in the spring, and At the
end of my freshman year, I both flunked out and
needed to go to work. The money was thin, so I went
back to Houston. I worked at Foley's, actually for
a leasee of Foley's, but it was in their department
store. called the Coin and Currency Institute of
New York. They operated an independent coin shop
in Foley's. And so I was the number two person of
three for a year and a half. I did go to U of H part of
that time.
It was clear that I wanted to be commissioned and
that I wanted to graduate. I scratched and clawed
every single semester that I was here. In those
days, even with somebody with my stature, they
would let take 20 hours a semester so you could
graduate in four years. And that, you know, that
was stupidity for me. I mean, there was no chance of
having, if I had a C, it was going to be really good.
So I graduated with two grade points too many. in
the May of 1965, was a little off on my ROTC, so I did
summer camp at Fort Selle, Oklahoma after I
graduated. So I was commissioned up there. And
like I say, I had full blinders on, had absolutely
no career direction other than military service.
The purpose of graduating was that you had to in
order to be commissioned. All right, now today we
want to concentrate on those student years.
Describe how you became a part of the routine at
A&M. How did you get introduced to the lingo, to
the... Well, the short answer is just as a freshman
in the Corps. You just have to automatically know
what it was because it was still mandatory. You had
tremendous turnover. You know, if people,
retention was awful. You know, it was usually 50%
was considered good. I was on, because of my ROTC
experience in high school, I was on something
called the fish drill team. And that was kind of my,
you know, my haven to where good things happened. I
knew exactly what was going on there. We ate late
tables in Duncan Dining Hall, which meant that we
got to eat all we could hold, and the meals were
still, there were no classes at noon, so all three
formations still happened all the time, and there
wasn't any place to eat. other than on campus,
including the weekends. You might have gone to one
of the boarding houses for 75 cents if people had a
car and could go, but most of the time you just
stayed on campus. Describe a typical weekday,
class day. When did it begin and what happened
when? from the time you got up till you went to bed
that night? My memory is that you really didn't get
up until about 6.30. You know, the kids get up kind
of at first call. You know, maybe five or ten
minutes earlier at some stage, but pretty much at
first call. And you didn't fall out until the third
call. Freshmen and sophomores fell out at third
call, which was four or five minutes away from, you
know, the formation happening. And... My memory
is that you were inside a little bit on the wall and
people asked questions and things, but it seems to
me that that happened outside. We fell outside and
were in formation and there were still questions
and things going on. And then you would have
morning formation and you'd march off to chow. I
don't have distinctive memories. Most of my
memory relates to when I was a senior because when I
came back, As a sophomore, I changed to company G3.
I'd been in company F2 as a fish, but my buddies were
now juniors, and I was going to be a sophomore. And I
changed from 64 to class 65 because I knew I was
going to be with them the next three years, and it
was the right thing to do. So I was in G3 in the Sevesa
area. I lived in the Sevesa area every semester
except one. Only one semester did I live in the
Duncan area. We were a little more autonomous over
there. Pretty much did our own thing. Rarely saw
anybody from core staff. I never recall seeing the
commandant or anybody. You did see whoever the
commandant's duty officer was, usually at lunch,
because they had lunch over there with you. But you
didn't see those people much. So y'all didn't
march to Chow then? We marched to Sebesa every
single formation. Oh, you did, okay. Yes, all
three. But about what percentage of the Corps was
in the Sebesa area at that time? I would guess a
third, a quarter to a third. All four of the
corridor-style halls were Corps, and the When I
was a senior, the balcony style, some of those were
core. When they were first, the fall of 64 is when
those opened. Was there any difference in the
dormitory routine of what actually happened in
the core units in the core area and in the Northgate
area? As far as I know, there wasn't. It was
essentially the same. Sabisa was, you know, it was
fine. We marched right up the main steps there. But
my freshman year, you know, fish didn't eat a lot.
And there was always questions and things going
on. But I started to say, well, I go, my memory is of
breakfast formation is when I was a senior, is that
I would arrive. There were only, I think, four or
five of us that were seniors. because I was moved to
company G3. I'm sorry, from G3 to company A3. And
they had two seniors. My old unit, G3, it had 18. And
so they moved about three of us over there. Of
course, I thought it was a communist plot that this
was terrible and the commandant couldn't do this.
And since I was then a sophomore, junior, and I was
then senior advisor to the fish drill team, I knew
the commandant. So I went and saw Colonel Baker,
and he listened and smiled and said, you're going
to A3. And I said, thank you very much. And away I
went. And he was exactly right. I had a lot more fun
there. And I was the only senior that liked to go to
breakfast. So you only had to have one go. So I was
just about it. And I had my routine. I would arrive
at formation at the precise moment to salute. I
would hand off my Houston Post newspaper to a fish
in ranks, and we would head to Sabisa, and I would
drink coffee and read the paper. And if anybody
said anything at my table, I was not happy. I wanted
silence. And so they would kill to be on my table. So
they knew they had nothing to do or nobody was going
to bother them. It was a small, good time. Let's go
back to the fish drill team. You're the first
person that I have encountered who has mentioned
being on that drill team, tell this machine all
that you can remember about
the drill team and getting on it and what it
involved and what y'all did and everything. Well,
I had three sophomores in F2 that had been drill
team, and they were three very good people. You
know, strict, but fair. You know, I had respect for
them. And so they, I think we ended up with two
people in my unit Butch Gregory and myself that
were on the drill team. Because I'd been in ROTC, I
had some knowledge of those things, and I wasn't
any good, but I was as good as anybody else. In those
days, we had a lot of students from Central
Catholic High School in San Antonio at A&M and in
the Corps, a very large number. And I would
estimate the final drill team we ended up with
being around 40 people I bet 25 were from Central
Catholic High School. And for a period of 10 or 12
years, the commander was always from Central
Catholic. And we pretty much began to pattern our
drill after theirs. They had the drill team style
that we ended up with first.
You know, we made two or three little trips. We went
to Laredo. We went to LSU. We went to the Battle of
Flowers and Fiesta Fambo parades in San Antonio.
You said Oklahoma State? No, LSU, Louisiana
State. For a football game? No, it was a drill meet.
It was just a separate, independent drill meet.
Were there competitions? That was. And we were
fair.
But we beat the Jodies of Arlington for the first
time that anybody remembered, and just in a
parade. But they had an award for it. So they
thought we were better than sliced bread because
we were the first time anybody had beat them. And
relative to the way the drill team business got
pretty complicated in the later 60s and early 70s,
we were low key. We had one senior advisor, and he
was the wing commander and the RV commander. And
the only time we ever saw him was if we happened to do
a Jody for some reason against the RVs in some way,
kind of smart-alecky. Well, the next day he'd show
up and give us some advice. We had one junior
advisor, and he turned out to be on the RVs. So we saw
him about two or three times a week. I think we had
four sophomores, three of whom were in my outfit.
And all I remember is drilling. We had no monkey
business of any kind. Where, when, how long did you
all drill? We drilled normally 5 to 6.30 and then
end up in late tables around 6.45 at Duncan. And you
drilled over in the Duncan area? Well, no, we
drilled on the parking lot at Guyon Hall. Oh. Right
here at Rudder Tower. And then we would end up being
on Simpson Drill Field, just the drill field then.
As far as you were aware, what was the selection
process? If you could drill. How did you know and
they know? Well, they watched. I mean, there
were... 1,400 people, freshmen, tried out for the
drill team, and they ended up with 40. Oh, okay.
Just by drilling. Okay. So there was a...
selection and that was done about when? Oh it
started about the second week of school and they
had it thinned out to probably 90 or so by the end of
the first semester and then grades would cause
attrition and you would have probably 40. And it
lasted all year? Lasted all year. Let's see on
Corps trips y'all did not march separately did
you? Only the last Corps trip They would march
separately in the parade in Austin. I can remember
doing that. But not, what about football games? At
the very, usually the last home march in, you could
at least march in. You were never good enough to do
that. But no performance. Did you and other
members become recognized within the Corps as
being drill team members? Yes. Was that a plus?
Yes, I think from all the military and respect
purposes it was a plus. It probably didn't help my
grades any. Did it get you out of any of the events
that some outsiders might have called hazing? It
might have, because I have, you know, I have almost
no memory, you know, of the very many things, you
know, that I think happened, you know, to me. You
know, you can't ever say never. But, I mean, I can
think of two or three times, but that's all. Can you
describe those? And then as a sophomore, I
remember none. Can you describe any of those
freshman things here? Let me think. Whether it
involved you or not, it doesn't matter. Well, when
we were freshmen, they had a practice of, it was
called stealing the commander's footlocker. And
we did that and a few personal items and sent it to
his girlfriend somewhere up around Waco. And then
you would normally give it back at the Texas game.
Even if it was in Austin, you still hauled it out
there and sat it. on the field at Memorial Stadium,
or you did it here. There was a little shenanigans
related to that, but it just wasn't very much. I
know since I've been here forever that some of
those began to be highly ritualistic and pretty
aggressive, and so we've had to have a very you
know, active campaign of not allowing that kind of
stuff. But I remember it in a good bull sense. Do you
remember the victim of that theft giving you all
any payback? Barked, well that's what I meant,
where it was very little. You know, he barked a time
or two. But he could say hello and you thought he was
barking. I mean, he was a big guy. His name was Billy
Mack McCutcheon. And I've seen him, you know, a
handful of times. He ended up working for the
extension service. But they had a pretty big
presence. Seniors looked like they were pretty
big and pretty old and pretty seasoned when you
were a freshman. Describe the ritual in the dining
halls. The dining halls, like I say, that's where
most of the campusology questions and stuff took
place. More than in, as much as in the dorm. And then
if you screwed up, well then that's when you had to
do something, you know, later. Or you didn't get to
eat as much or whatever. There was, you were being
fed, the waiter system, you know, that was still in
effect. And so you had freshmen basically
operated the table. You had meal service for the
seniors and juniors at the table. And then you
operated hot corner, which is where the food came
in, in bowls. And you made sure it was all dumped up.
And then after everybody had some, then the
freshmen got it. But they brought food until you
told them not to bring any more. And once the game
was over, Freshmen could hang back as long as they
wanted to. Nowadays, they eat in 12 minutes and
they're gone out of the dining hall, which to me is
still amazing. Because we, at night, we'd go in
there at 6.30. The upperclassmen would usually be
gone by 7 or 7.05. The fish didn't leave until about
7.20. I mean, you would, there would be 500 fish in
there getting food from every table in there and
eating until you couldn't eat anymore. And then
you'd get back to the dorm just in time for call to
quarters, and everybody thought that was fine.
They didn't bother you about it. Share some of the
nicknames you remember for food items. Oh, bull
neck and was meat and blood. Was bull meat, bull
neck, was chicken? I think all meat. Yeah, I think
it was all. I think it was. Blood was ketchup, sand
and salt and pepper, cow's milk and sky's water.
Were all desserts cush? All desserts were cush.
You didn't get any cush as a fish. The exception was
if the fish football team defeated the
Shorthorns, which still existed when I was in
school, then there was some kind of, I think,
cherry pie or cherry cheesecake or something.
There was something you could have. for the
remainder of the year. The best dessert was Boston
cream pie, and the odds of a freshman getting any of
that was, you know, full zero. For some reason, the
upperclassmen did not like bread pudding, and we
would have so you got an entire platter for eight.
of bread pudding as a fish. And fortunately, I
still think it's wonderful. Only I've been to some
places now that have really good bread pudding.
What was your favorite dining hall food? Did you
have any? That's a good question. I don't know that
I would name one. Was there any that you didn't
like? You wouldn't eat fried eggs on a bet. I mean,
the eggs were know still moving you know if they
were either scrambled or fried you know it didn't
matter they were still kind of moving around so you
wouldn't eat those which reminds me we did really
like jelly fritters you know, which is basically
old bread, you know, stuffed with some jelly and
kind of fried. And those would be, you know, they
were lapped up in short order. Recall, if you can,
some of the pranks that you were aware of that were
played at the dining hall. In the dining hall? It
was fairly common on the nights that you had yell
practice. in the evenings, which was two nights a
week, usually things were pretty loose, fun, good
time, and goofy stuff was going on. Maybe you had
the meal under the table and everybody laughed and
thought that was wonderful. or you might have had
the meal off the table, just dumped the food on
there. You probably had freshmen scurrying
around under tables lighting bibs of
upperclassmen and then trying to make sure you got
away before it flared up. There was some kind of
game that the upperclassmen played where there
was a certain way to stack the silverware where you
could pop a spoon or something and stick a fork in
the ceiling. And I can't remember exactly how it
was, but I have a pretty clear memory that we were
real good at that and that that was fairly common.
Did anybody ever try to put some kind of hot
seasoning or anything in somebody else's food?
Did y'all ever? I'm sure it happened, but my only
memory of hot stuff is that if you, you know,
buzzing was laughing. So if you had, especially a
freshman, but it might have applied to a sophomore
too, you know, just some reason get tickled and
start laughing, well then they'd think you ought
to eat some busberries, you know, which were the
peppers that were always on the table. Mm-hmm.
with that kind of hot sauce that's vinegar and
peppers like you'd put on spinach. And then there
was always hot sauce. There was the
small bottles of hot sauce, Tabasco.
Did you feel that freshman year that your outfit
was a special group? If so, why? Yeah, I think so. We
had pretty, like I say, significant turnover, but
we had some people that I definitely do still know
to this time. I think we must have been fairly laid
back. I can remember some good times and basically
everybody kind of doing their job, but I don't have
any nasty memories. I
have one guy that I think out of all those years that
maybe didn't conduct himself as he might like to be
judged today. Did you, that year, begin some
friendships that have been a lifetime? Several.
Typical day of classes, what did you wear and what
was the routine? It was regular uniform. of the
morning you would come back from breakfast and get
your books and head out the door and I always seemed
like I always had eight o'clock I liked that for
myself because it fit me and then you would come
back go to lunch formation and then in the
afternoons you usually had a couple of hours where
you weren't committed after three o'clock you
might not be committed and then what'd you do
regular unit had intramurals you know from 4 30 or 5
till chow time but drill teams were replaced
intramurals what did you do if you had any any
non-scheduled hours during the day
who knows run errands go to the post office And pray
that Aunt Ruth had sent brownies. Go to the
laundry. Might run a few little details for
somebody around the dorm. They might like for you
to get their laundry when you went to get yours. If
you wanted to escape entirely from the core
routine, was there a place? I would say it was just
Cushing Library. And I didn't go there nearly
enough, but it was quiet and there was no core
activity that occurred in the library. The MSC, to
me, was a little more formal in that there were a lot
of upperclassmen using the MSC. So my perception
was the freshmen used it if they had to. And the MSC
really seemed like the true living room. It seemed
like the living room. It did indeed. Did you meet
Wayne Stark that year? Do you remember? Yeah, if I
did, it would have just been at
what's now known as MSC Open House, where they had a
reception. And in those days, General Rutter and
General Hannigan and Polly Stark and a few people
shook hands with all of the freshmen. Of course, I
guess there were 1,500
to 2,000 freshmen, but I can remember that.
Describe your first impressions of Earl Rudder.
What did he look like, seem like? He was a fairly
imposing man. Seemed formal but polite. I
remember General Hannigan also seemed formal,
but seemed very polite, just his manner. And I had
an occasion to talk with him two or three times my
freshman year on things, and he wrote notes
incessantly, and he used great big